The President:
This week, I nominated Judge
Sonia Sotomayor of the U.S.
Court of Appeals to replace
Justice David Souter,
who's retiring after nearly two
decades on the Supreme Court.
After reviewing many
terrific candidates,
I am certain that
she's the right choice.
In fact, there has not been a
nominee in several generations
who's brought the depth of
judicial experience to this job
that she offers.
Judge Sotomayor's career began
when she served as an Assistant
District Attorney in New York,
prosecuting violent crimes in
America's largest city.
After leaving the DA's office,
she became a litigator,
representing clients in complex
international legal disputes.
She was appointed to
the U.S. District Court,
serving six years as a trial judge where she presided over
hundreds of cases.
And most recently, she has
spent eleven years on the U.S.
Court of Appeals, our nation's
second highest court,
grappling with some of the most
difficult constitutional and
legal issues we
face as a nation.
She has more experience on the
federal bench than any incoming
Supreme Court Justice in
the past hundred years.
Quite simply, Judge Sotomayor
has a deep familiarity with our
judicial system from
almost every angle.
And her achievements are all
the more impressive when you
consider what she had to
overcome in order to achieve them.
Judge Sotomayor grew up in a
housing project in the South
Bronx; her parents came to New
York from Puerto Rico during the
Second World War.
Her father was a factory worker
with a third grade education;
and when she was just nine
years old, he passed away.
Her mother worked six days a
week as a nurse to provide for
her and her brother, buying the
only set of encyclopedias in the
neighborhood and sending her
children to Catholic school.
That's what had made it possible
for Judge Sotomayor to attend
two of America's
leading universities,
graduating at the top of her
class at Princeton University,
and studying at Yale Law School
where she won a prestigious post
as an editor of the
school's Law Journal.
These many years later, it was
hard not to be moved by Judge
Sotomayor's mother, sitting
in the front row at the White
House, her eyes
welling with tears,
as her daughter --
who had come so far,
for whom she had sacrificed so
much -- was nominated to the
highest court in the land.
This is what makes Judge
Sotomayor so extraordinary.
Even as she has reached the
heights of her profession,
she's never forgotten
where she began.
She's faced down barriers,
overcome difficult odds,
and lived the American dream.
As a Justice of
the Supreme Court,
she will bring not only the
experience acquired over the
course of a brilliant
legal career,
but the wisdom accumulated over
the course of an extraordinary
journey -- a journey defined by
hard work, fierce intelligence,
and that enduring
faith that, in America,
all things are possible.
It's her experience in life and
her achievements in the legal
profession that have earned
Judge Sotomayor respect across
party lines and
ideological divides.
She was originally named to the U.S. District Court by the first
President Bush, a Republican.
She was appointed to the federal
Court of Appeals by President
Clinton, a Democrat.
She twice has been overwhelmingly confirmed by the
U.S. Senate.
And I am gratified by the
support for this nomination
voiced by members of the legal
community who represent views
from across the
political spectrum.
There are, of course, some in
Washington who are attempting to
draw old battle lines and
playing the usual political
games, pulling a few comments
out of context to paint a
distorted picture of
Judge Sotomayor's record.
But I am confident that
these efforts will fail;
because Judge Sotomayor's
17-year record on the bench --
hundreds of judicial decisions
that every American can read for
him or herself -- speak
far louder than any attack;
her record makes clear
that she is fair, unbiased,
and dedicated to
the rule of law.
As a fellow judge on her court,
appointed by Ronald Reagan,
said recently, "I don't think
I'd go as far as to classify her
in one camp or another.
I think she just deserves the
classification of outstanding judge."
Congress returns this week and
I hope the confirmation process
will begin without delay.
No nominee should be seated
without rigorous evaluation and
hearing; I expect nothing less.
But what I hope is that we can
avoid the political posturing
and ideological brinksmanship
that has bogged down this
process -- and Congress
-- in the past.
Judge Sotomayor ought to be on
the bench when the Supreme Court
decides what cases to hear
this year and I'm calling on
Democrats and Republicans to
be thorough -- and timely -- in
dealing with this nomination.
As President, there are few
responsibilities more serious or
consequential than the naming
of a Supreme Court Justice.
The members of our highest
court are granted life tenure.
They're charged with applying
principles put to paper more
than two centuries ago to some
of the most difficult questions
of our time.
And the impact of their
decisions extend beyond an
administration, but for
generations to come.
This is a decision that I've not
taken lightly and it's one that
I am proud to have made.
I know that Justice Sotomayor
will serve this nation with distinction.
And when she ascends those
marble steps to assume her seat
on the Supreme Court, bringing
a lifetime of experience on and
off the bench, America will have
taken another important step
towards realizing the ideal that
is chiseled above its entrance:
Equal justice under the law.
Thanks.